Sex, death, and violence: three constant through-lines of human existance. 
 
I, Claudius had its fair share of hard-to-watch scenes, although the hardest - a scene of Caligula carving a foetus out of a dead Drusilla and eating her - was infamously cut. 

This damn line: "King? Well, but this is a Republic, isn't it?"

One of I, Claudius's greatest tragedies was that for all of his lofty aspirations to restore the Republic, when the imperial machine finally caught up to him, Claudius realized he was simply too late. Here, he doesn't even realize the Republic is gone. And it's not as if this version of Rome has its true-to-life anti-monarchical sentiment, either. Prior to ascending to power, Caligula is referred to routinely as "prince." 

"One month of games, and a gold coin for every Roman, to celebrate the birth of my son - MY. SON. - Julia Drusilla!"

Caligula meet Ceasonia while crossdressing as a priestess of Isis.
Caligula has a group of "homosexuals who've been castrated" guard Caesonia - and keep her on a leash. 
He kills a man while wearing a dress.
Caligula is in the habit of strutting flamboyantly and striking poses, a number of which involve at least one limp wrist. 

His first appearance is sitting poolside while Tiberius bathes with his "little fishies." Tiberius commands Caligula to do the dance he used to entertain his father's soldiers with as a child, and Claudius laughs, but not maliciously. He doesn't understand that he's witnessing a cruel power play on Tiberius's part; he just sees his nephew doing a funny dance. 

He ends that scene by being kicked into the pool by Caligula, which isn't entirely undeserved. And while Claudius is presumably floundering around, trying to get himself out of the pool, what are Tiberius and Caligula doing? Well, they're just having a nice chat as they take a walk...straight into an orgy. 

In the middle of this conversation, Tiberius tells Caligula that he'll die, before descending in what looks to be a manpowered elevator and just leaving Caligula there. Caligula races through the orgy and down multiple flights of stairs to catch up. He reunites with Tiberius on the bottom floor, where the lights are lower and the orgy is...different. There's a person with two noses, two mouths, and three eyes. One man has two hands growing out of each wrist. Twins, conjoined at the head, look on in indifference as a man lowers himself onto a large, metal toy. 

I was surprised that people with physical disabilities and [....] are not sexually active in Gore Vidal's vision, but they are standing amongst the action. 

Gemellus, who is clearly still a teenager, joins them there, although he doesn't enjoy or even take notice of the ongoings surrounding him. But where's Claudius? Either still in the pool, pulling himself out of the pool, or heading away from the pool; either way, he's not here.


When Tiberius asks whether Tiberius prefers nymphs or satyrs, Caligula says, "I like both, Lord." Tiberius, who has his "little fishies", replies, "One needs both. Yes. To keep healthy." And that, coming from a man covered in sores - presumably from venereal disease - says a lot. It's probably worth noting that depending on the cut of the movie you watch, even Gemellus has a same-sex encounter with a guard. And what do these guys have in common? They're members of the imperial family, and during the course of the movie, they die. 

The only member of the imperial family who doesn't die throughout the course of the film? Claudius.

And if you're thinking, "Come on, that's just how history worked out. Claudius was the last surviving male in his family line," it's worth noting that both Cesonia and Nerva had their deaths rewritten for the sake of the plot. 

In a film that puts so much emphasis on sex - who has it, where they have it, how they have it - I think it's really worth mentioning that Claudius...

It's also worth noting that this film subscribes to a 1970s view of sexuality, not an ancient view. This is all but confirmed when Caligula states that Ceasonia is being kept on a metaphorical and /physical/ leash by, and I quote, "homosexuals who've been castrated." While the idea of sexual preferences was.../// The idea of homosexuality is as out-of-place in ancient Rome as Tiberius's elevator, or that massive, spinning decapitation machine that kills people as they're buried up to their necks and people throw food at them.

Oh. Yeah. That's a thing in this movie. But we don't have time for that, because we're doing queer theory. 

So, this movie makes several mentions of same-sex attraction, but... One of the most blatantly homoerotic scenes, the meeting of the priestesses of Isis, is mainly just women bathing in rose petals for the viewing pleasure of the male audience - highlighted by the fact that aside from Caligula, disguised as a priestess, no men are privy to this encounter. 

This is supposed to be a political commentary, right? And a deep, experimental one at that. I mean, there's a scene where Caligula starts angrily bleating like a sheep in front of the senate and they bleat back at him. Wow. I'd analyze it in this podcast, but the complex implications of that were just too vast for my tiny brain to handle. But I did pick up on just a tiny piece of Vidal's revolutionary social message: being gay is the sign of moral deprivation. This movie was produced in the mid-1979s, at a time when the gay liberation movement was sweeping the globe. In a movie famous for its unsimulated sex scenes, the camera cuts away before two women share a kiss. 

Vidal originally wanted to include even more homosexual content, to really hammer home that the queers were taking over society and rotting it from the inside out. Why couldn't he? Because he couldn't get it past the censors. The same purity culture that Vidal mourned the death of in his movie was alive, kicking, and stopping said movie from being released.

Claudius looks on in horror as Caligula is stabbed to death, clutching his comically large dice, before immediately ducking behind the first pillar he sees. He's found /literally immediately/, drops down to his knees, and within a matter of seconds is crowned and foisted onto the Praetorian Guards' shoulders as they chant "Hail Claudius Caesar." He drops the crown as soon as it's put on his head, but his dice are still firmly in hand as the Praetorian Guard carry him away - as simultaneously, Caligula's corpse is laid out on the steps besides Caesonia's. Longinus picks up the crown and Tiberius's signet ring and takes off running. 

So, the empire is in the hands of the moron who still thought it was a Republic. Only not really, because the metonym for imperial power, Tiberius's signet ring, is literally in the hands of Longinus. 

So, why does this exist? To answer that question, we just have to ask Gore Vidal - he literally will not shut up about it. 

I don't think there's any question that Vidal's vision failed. But for some reason, there are still people who endeavor to reconstruct /Caligula/ as Vidal would have wanted it. But honestly, I think the multiple fact that Caligula turned out a mangled, nonsensical mess because Vidal couldn't get gay stuff past the censors proves just how out of touch his ideas were. He was not living in, as he thought, some moral cesspool of a society run by queer people, who also happen to be perverts, because in Vidal's world those two were one and the same. And it's interesting, because I'm not sure if Vidal ever could realise that his exploitative, gross-out display of homosexuality and the censors saying "No. We can't show this. Put it back" really were two sides of the same coin - both were saying "this is awful and we can't have it in our society", but while Vidal spun a pornographic cautionary tale about it, the censors chose the out of sight, out of mind approach.

And those reconstructions? Why do they exist?

For a man who conceived of an over two hour film filled with unsimulated orgy scenes, Vidal was, at heart, a prude whose defining work rails against people who live differently than he does. 
