It is disturbingly easy to break your life down into story beats.

If you were asked to, it would probably take you a matter of minutes to sift through every experience that you remember, separating what's useful from what's not. Not just that, but you could spin your life into /several/ stories - each with a different set of events, sometimes overlapping but framed in different ways, conveying a different mood and serving a different purpose. The same memory could be a comedic vignette in one story and a meaningful turning point in another. The absolute crux of one story might not even /appear/ in another.

Now imagine spinning stories out of a life you've only heard about /in stories/ - I know, I'm asking you to imagine the entire genre of historical fiction, but bear with me here. Not only would you have to choose which moments to include in your retelling, but whether to keep the pre-attached framing from a previous retelling.

And now, finally, imagine trying to do this all about a life that was, at the very least, uncommonly eventful, and probably a bit closer to batshit insane. We're talking violence, political intruige, and intergenerational incest. But with so much there, and a whole tradition of stories to remix and reframe, how many ways do you think you could spin that?

[musical interlude]

Hello, everyone! Welcome to The Man, the Myth, the Pumpkin, a podcast where we look at fictionalisations of the emperor Claudius' life and ask ourselves, "Why does this exist?" My name is Sophia Sarro, and thank you for joining me for this weird little academic experiment. 

First of all, I should probably start off with some historical context or this is gonna sound a whole lot weirder than it already is. Tiberius Claudius Nero Germanicus, who would later become Tiberius Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus, was born in 10 BCE. His father Drusus was the son of the empress Livia, and his mother Antonia Minor was the niece of the emperor Augustus, meaning Claudius would be raised as part of imperial Rome's first dynastic family. 

Whereas most Julio-Claudian boys were raised for military and political careers, Claudius was counted out of those career paths from an early age due to his limp, physical tics, and significant hearing loss, as well as speaking with a stutter. He was instead trained to be a historian. That did not stop him from seeking political office during the reigns of his grandfather Augustus and uncle Tiberius though - although the varying success of these bids led to him going into an early retirement and spending a considerable amount of his time gambling.

During Caligula's reign, he brought his uncle Claudius out of political retirement and appointed him co-consul. And when Caligula was assassinated, his co-consul was a clear contender for his successor. It took a lot of bribes, and the merciless execution of some conspiritors, but the Julio-Claudians' power was restored as Claudius was declared emperor.

Speedrun of his reign: Aqueducts were built. Rome conquered Brittania. Claudius put his own wife, Valeria Messalina, to death after she was /allegedly/ plotting to overthrow him. He proposed two new letters of the Latin alphabet; they didn't catch on. And in 54 CE, he died after naming his stepson Nero as his political heir.

I cannot emphasize this enough: it may be easy to break a life down into story beats, but it is /HARD/ to fit sixty-four years of it into a matter of seconds. But now that you have my slapdash version of Claudius's life, you're ready for Seneca the Younger's far more thought-out rendition of his /afterlife/. Let's talk Apokolokintosis. 

[musical interlude]

Apokolokintosis, or the Pumpkinification of the Divine Claudius, is a Roman satire attributed to Seneca the Younger by Cassius Dio. The title is a portmanteau of apotheosis, the ancient Greek word for ascension to godhood, and kolokynth, the ancient Greek word for gourd - or, as it's often translated now, pumpkin. If you think it's a weird title, scholars agree, and have been debating the significance of Claudius turning into a gourd instead of a god for centuries.

Compared to whatever the title is supposed to be, the plot is fairly simple.

Claudius  dies and ascends to heaven, where he promptly terrifies Hercules just by showing up. He attempts to smooth-talk the gods into letting him stay in heaven, but when the gods are voting on whether or not he should become a god, Augustus cuts in and tells everyone what a horrible person he was. He's then dragged away by Mercury. They pass Claudius's own funeral on their journey, and for the first time, Claudius actually realizes he's dead. He's content though, because people are singing contrived funeral songs that flatter him - he blissfully ignores the fact that quack lawyers are the only ones who are genuinely upset that he's gone. When he and Mercury arrive in the underworld, Claudius rejoices upon seeing so many people he knew in life. As it turns out, all of these people hate his guts. They put him on trial for killing countless people - literally "as many as there are grains of sand on the seashore" - and sentence him to the worst imaginable punishment - which, for a gambling addict, is spending an eternity with a bottomless dice box that won't actually let him throw his dice. Within the last few sentences of the story, Caligula swoops in, claims him, and gives him as a gift to Aecus, who passes him off again to Menander, who uses him as his law clerk. It's a very eventful last three lines.

So, let's talk about the grand, overarching theme here: everyone hates Claudius. Claudius's own late grandfather hates Claudius. The gods, after Augustus exposes him for what he is, hate Claudius. The people in the underworld /DESPISE/ Claudius. And within the story, everyone has a well-established reason to do so. At least Hercules has mixed feelings towards him - unfortunately for Claudius, the mix is between hatred and fear. 

Hercules is a special case too, because while some of the gods were willing to give him the benefit of the doubt prior to Augustus's speech, Hercules hates him right from the get-go. To a modern audience, the joke is as obvious as it is unfunny: someone known for his strength, virility, and nigh-invincibility is afraid of someone who couldn’t pose a threat to him if he tried - without any underlings to assassinate people for him, that is. It’s the old lion-afraid-of-a-mouse trope, just as shallow here as it is in any children’s cartoon - or so I thought. But when you think of Hercules as the /pinnacle/ of virility, repulsed by the physically disabled and morally deplorable Claudius, things get a lot more interesting. Hercules is afraid of Claudius before he even hears of his crimes, strictly because of his physical disabilities.

The intersection between Classical studies and disability studies has been booming lately, and it’s a bit late but we can still give the obligatory round of applause. But because ability and masculinity were so intertwined in the ancient Roman mind, we cannot truly talk about disability in ancient Rome without also talking about gender. The Roman /vir bonus/ is a man in control of himself, who is also able to exercise control over the people around him. And one of the ideal Roman man's tools for asserting his own authority is through his powers of speech. Thus, it seems like no coincidence that when Claudius is showing off his rhetorical abilities, spinning Homeric-style verses to explain who he is and where he came from, Fever cuts him off and tells him to stop talking nonsense. Claudius is exercising the form of masculine authority he actually can, and promptly gets cut off by a female deity more powerful than he could ever be.

Meaning, Hercules is shuddering not only at the sight of a disabled person, but at the gaping vacuum standing in place of Roman masculinity. Claudius cannot control the movement of his own head or the way that he walks, and when he attempts to influence others through his speech, he fails at that too. He is a total failure as a Roman man, and Hercules is horror-struck by the very concept.

Once you realise that, it's easy to see that the only male characters who tolerate Claudius are those who stand to gain from him. Mercury originally aims to help him out - by which I mean begs Clotho to "mercifully" end his life. The narrator establishes that Mercury is fond of Claudius, which some scholars say must be completely ironic given that Mercury is the god of cleverness. However, I don't think it's too far-fetched that the god of merchants and travellers would approve of the man who commissioned the Roman port at Ostia. Regardless, as soon as Mercury learns the extent of Claudius's cruelty, he personally drags him to the lower regions of the underworld by the nape of his neck. No matter what Claudius has done for Mercury's devotees, the god cannot be swayed.

Caligula, on the other hand, doesn't need to be swayed. He actively seeks out Claudius specifically so he can use him. He specifically claims that Claudius is "in servitutem" - that he has enslaved Claudius. This blow to his agency is particularly damning because being Caligula’s co-consul was Claudius's most notable political stint prior to being emperor, and in spite of it not being a particularly glamorous or gratifying job - Suetonius tells of Caligula throwing him in a river at one point, and whether or not that actually happened it gets the point across - this could very easily be framed as Claudius regaining some measure of control in his life. That makes the inversion here - portraying it as enslavement - a particularly cruel jab.

We also have Menander, a freedman whose control is undercut by his previous enslavement. I do not have to explain why the Roman emperor being controlled by a freedman would be seen by the Romans as something so unthinkable, it could only appear in satire.

And in the living world, where most Romans are celebrating and "walking around like free men," the lowest-ranking lawyers sincerely mourn his death, as the /real/ lawyers - and thus, lawful order for Rome - have reemerged after Claudius's death. These are the men who benefitted from Claudius's corruption, and they are mourning that their days of privelege have come to an end.

So, who is Claudius in this piece? He's out of control both physically and morally. The only people who tolerate him do so not for who he is, but what he can offer them. He is at his best when serving his social inferiors - disgracing the office of princeps while doing so - and he borders on monsterous when enacting his own desires. He is a failed leader and a failed man.

[musical interlude]

And so we return to the question, "Why was this written?" Because most scholars agree that this was written by Seneca around 54 CE, right at the beginning of Nero's reign. And while the prevailing theory is that Seneca wrote it for Saturnalia, it still doesn't make all that much sense to say, "Hey, you know the guy who hand-selected our current leader? You know, the one who adopted him, named him as his heir, let him marry his daughter, and overall just gave him a big old stamp of approval? Yeah, guy was a bloodthirsty lunatic."

I think there are two main things going on here: for one, the story establishes that Claudius has /no idea/ that people aren't on his side. Remember when Claudius shows up in the bad part of the underworld and sees an angry mob? He literally says "πάντα φίλων πλήρη" - "Plenty of friends, everywhere!" He has absolutely no self-awareness, allowing Nero to be simultaneously liked by Claudius and completely opposed to Claudius. Nero could have hated Claudius's guts, and dreamed of the day he could rectify everything his great-uncle/adopted father/father-in-law did wrong, and it would have been totally in-character for Claudius to have straight up not noticed.

And then we also have this conspicuous line, near the beginning of the story: "At Lachesis, quae et ipsa homini formosissimo faveret, fecit illud plena manu, et Neroni multos annos de suo donat" - "But Lachesis, who herself, too, had a fondness for the handsomest of men, wrought with generous hand, and bestowed upon Nero many years from her own store."

What Seneca has done here is set up a hole for Nero to fill. Somebody needs to bring virtue and virility back to the principate, and to carry on Augustus's legacy in a way that Tiberius, Caligula, and Claudius have failed to do. And here comes Nero, a young man in his prime, favored by the gods, perfectly poised to do just that.

The only downside of this medium is that you can't feel me obnoxiously elbowing you in the ribs.

[musical interlude]

"But wait," you say, "this story is named after pumpkins! And this /podcast/ is named after this story which is named after pumpkins! Where are the pumpkins?"

And I'm glad you asked, because the title of this work worth examining. The fact that Cassius Dio glosses this title upon mentioning it implies that his audience would not have necessarily understood the joke off the bat. And even after the gloss, the audience still might not have gotten it. And scholars hypothesize that this might have been the point: the title is as unexpected and /wrong/ as Claudius's time as emperor. 

And of course, our common English translation "pumpkinification" came about centuries later, after Europeans learned that squash existed. And that's the coolest part: the title isn't static. It has an ambiguous meaning that continues to change, depending on its context. If that doesn't sum up the material we're dealing with, I don't know what does. 

Thank you guys. If you want to read more about anything we covered, a bibliography for this episode is available on Twitter - just search for the handle @ManMythPumpkin. This podcast was made possible by Doctor Joel Christensen. 
