Have you ever missed something /really/ obvious? And then, when you finally realized it, it wasn't even a civilized moment of "whoops, of course that's the case." No, you're actually thrown off guard by this...

That's actually happened a couple of times in this podcast alone. That whole "intersection between ability and gender" thing I keep harping on? That was not part of the original research plan. At all. I had somehow overlooked that gender - which affects nearly every aspect of human interaction - would be a key component here.

So, let's talk about something else I missed - something that caused a paradigmn shift in countless lives and countless cultures. [...] And something which, to be fair, isn't the first thing that comes to mind when we're talking early imperial Rome.

We're talking about World War I.

[musical interlude]

Welcome back to The Man The Myth, The Pumpkin, a podcast where we look at representations of the emperor Claudius throughout time and ask ourselves "why does this exist?" And this time, we're not alone! Joining us will be Classict Maia Lee-Chin, whose book /Quid Pro Quo/ will be coming out soon! Maia is as wonderful a scholar as she is a person and I am so hyped for us to discuss 


While /Woman/ is in a new format, it presents the same version of Claudius that we've seen for since Seneca.
And then, something changed. In 1934, down-on-his-luck Classicist Robert Graves published his first novel, /I, Claudius/, in order to earn some extra cash. The book was massively successful, and the following year he released a companion novel, /Claudius the God and His Wife Messalina/. Today, the works of Robert Graves are considered a high point for American literature, and often feature on arbitrary, Western-centric lists of the best books of all time. This may not have been the first pop culture portrayal in which Claudius was portrayed as /not the butt of every joke/, but it was certainly the first that I had found. /I, Claudius/ draws heavily from Suetonius's Life of Claudius, and especially plays off of (Suetonius 1.1) where he states that Claudius exaggerates his condition in order to stay alive. This Claudius is shrewd, cautious, and [...]. He is also, unlike his historical counterpart, a staunch defender of the Republic that his family has since replaced. 

So, what changed? To put it simply, the world did.

By 1934, returning veterans from World War I had had over a decade to readjust to civilian life - and, after the horrors they had witnessed, many found that remarkably hard. [] percent of veterans also returned with permanent disabilities. Claudius, who had to navigate a world hostile to the disabled - Claudius, the brother of Germanicus Caesar, a great soldier who died tragically young - Claudius, who lived in bleak and broken surroundings that never got better, in spite of his family's wealth - was the perfect protagonist for post-war America. 

This view of CLaudius post World War I also explains why he was so big on defending a Republic at risk, even if he was ultimately two generations too late. 

Also, as you may have gleaned from the title /I, Claudius/, the novels, unlike every other source we've examined so far, are written in the first person. The idea is that these are the memoirs that Claudius wrote and hid, in order to expose the corruption of his family to Rome. The entire point of the novels is that Claudius, the character being pushed around the most throughout the story, is ultimately in control of the narrative. Therefore, whereas previous iterations of Claudius have called him barely a person if not for the people around him, every choice made throughout the novels - which events are included, how other charaters are portrayed, the fact that the narrative is being written at all - serves to flesh out Claudius's character. 


American women had been strongly encouraged to work during the war, only for this perceived "masculinization" of women to recieve pushback in the twenties. As of 1934, women's roles were even more in flux, as many men felt emasculated by their inability to support their families during the Great Depression. Women were caught in a limbo of [...] - and in some cases, being the sole breadwinner and caretaker, as suicide rates of adult men [...].

When in conversation with the struggle of American women post-World War I, Messalina's bid for power becomes more sympathetic. She is not portrayed as /right/, but no character who actively vies for power actually is /right/. 

Speaking of women vieing for power, we can't overlook Livia's role in the novel. She tows the line between... Ultimately, her involvement in politics - and the "world of men" at large - leads her to kill her own husband. It isn't wrong that she's involved because she's a woman; it's wrong for anyone to be involved, because the system is falling in on itself and killing nearly everyone involved. Whether or not women /should/ be involved is irrelevant. Livia /is/ involved, just like the men are, and the circumstances...

The world that Claudius inhabits strikes a strange balance between being updated and being true to Suetonius's description. As I mentioned earlier, author Robert Graves was a Classicist. 

The heart of the story, which gets ripped out rather early on, is Claudius's relationship with his brother Germanicus. Germanicus Caesar was spoken of highly in the ancient sources, and seemed poised to be Tiberius's successor before dying suddenly of illness. After World War I... It was in Germanicus's death that Graves took an interesting creative liberty, underscoring the corruption of the whole world around Germanicus. While everyone around him thinks that he died of illness - a tragic, but natural and ultimately unavoidable death - Caligula reveals to Claudius decades later that he had poisoned his own father. Like Augustus and Tiberius, Germanicus did not die a natural death, but was killed as a result of the broken system around him - the system that he, if only he had lived long enough, was determined to fix. Think about how that must have resonated with people after the war. 

And now it's the time you guys have been waiting for. Just to preface, Maia Lee-Chin is already a wildly successful scholar despite being my age, a fellow graduate of the class of '21. She was awarded the position of Fenwick Scholar during her senior year of college, and spent the year creating and carrying out a program to teach local elementary students in Worcester, MA about the /Iliad/. At the heart of this program was the desire not to talk down to, but to talk /to/ people who are usually counted out of the field of Classics. This project is one of the major reasons that I wanted to interview her - the other, of course, is the fact that she, like our friend Robert Graves, is writing a book!

Hi, Maia!

Now, I wanted to preface your accomplishments but obviously I didn't want to talk over you. How would you describe your past projects?

In my opinion, one of the coolest things about your work is the genuine push for [...]. What motivated you to ...?



Can you go a little bit into the book-writing process?

Both when working with children and while writing this book, you have to find new ways of explaining everything. Has it been difficult to avoid Classics jargon that people outside of the field would have no reason to know? Has explaining things in ways other than you might hear them in class or read them in an academic paper recontextualized things for you at all?

I'm about to ask you to think back a couple of years. Pertaining to your Fenwick Scholar project, you had an interesting anecdote about the kids' interpretation of Book 22 of the Iliad, specifically Achilles saying that there are no pacts between men and lions, being completely different than what scholars usually agree it to mean. How often have things like that happened to you, where phrasing things differently or presenting them to different audiences sparks something completely unexpected?


When people finish reading your book, do you have something in mind that you'd like them to come away thinking about?
