The Man, The Myth, The Podcast:


I was presented with three formats in which I could present my research: a formal thesis, an academic paper, and a creative project. When I asked for an example of what the creative project might look like, I told that another student would be creating a "touch cart" - a display of artifacts that people could not only see and read about, but handle, which would be available for visitors at [where the touch cart is]. That caught my attention immediately. Getting info out the the public was the entire reason that I pursued Classics, and a the one thing that I definitely wanted to do after grad school. If I did a creative project, I would not have to wait until graduation to pursue that goal. My research could be released directly to the public, instead of sequestered in a Master's thesis that no one would read. 

"For our process it's about focusing on content and argument, and rhetoric comes at the end." My entire thing is moving away from the academic style of writing. This should be fun. This should be engaging. This should explain each academic buzzword that I use. 



There was only one complication: a touch cart, while being a wonderful format for archaeological research, would be staggeringly underwhelming when presenting literature. I could not imagine that handling my paperback copy of /I, Claudius/ would greatly enhance anyone's educational experience. Still, I was thoroughly sold on the concept of a creative project. 

Claudius was going to be the central through-line in a project spanning time, space, and genre. His continued relevance would... It would also raise the question of why, throughout all of these varied sources, Claudius was still considered relevant? Why was his story preserved and reworked so frequently? By undertaking this project, I was by no means aiming to answer this question. Instead, my goal was to spark similar questions within the minds of the audience. I want people to question why stories about Rome have been a cultural touchstone throughout so many societies. I want them to stop taking for granted that Rome was some sort of cultural constant. 

Thus, the idea for /The Man, the Myth, the Pumpkin/ was born - and it was absolutely ludicrous. The first problem was that I had no idea whether there would be an audience for the podcast. The entire purpose of doing a creative project, as I have just stated, was to get the information out to whoever wanted it - if nobody wanted it, I might as well have written the formal thesis. I also had no experience scripting, recording, editing, producing, or distributing a podcast. I was not qualified to make this podcast, and had, at the very most, five months to make it happen. And if the Classics department decided that the podcast did not measure up to their standards - standards which had not yet been formally defined, as this was not the usual format for presenting Master's research - I would not receive my degree. 

I had been pitching this podcast through the lens of disability scholarship mainly for the idea of it being streamlined. It was clear early on, though, that intersectional scholarship would be necessary. 

The first step, now that I had a plan, was to gather primary sources. ...varying levels of difficulty. Despite being the least recent, the ancient sources were the easiest to find. 

The sources from the 20th and 21st century were also widely available, although protected by copyright. 

Unsurprisingly, the medeival depictions of Claudius were by far the most difficult to access. [As an undergraduate, I had spent four years contributing to the Homer Multitext Project, an international initiative that transcribed and digitized Byzantine manuscripts of the Homeric epics. This experience reading manuscripts would prove vital when reading my medeival sources.] This was a good problem to have, as it provided an opportunity to talk about the arbitrary prioritization of ancient historians over medeival historians.



I knew how to make a website through GitHub - and by "knew how," I meant that someone had walked me through the process two years ago and I planned to replicate that success purely through the power of believing in myself.


For the past year, the name of the game had been self-sabotage. And no matter what I tried, I could not break myself out of that cycle. But there was one thing I hadn't tried: leaning into it. In my most extreme act of self-sabotage to date, I was going to stake my entire Master's degree on a project that was all but doomed to fail. 



It goes without saying that reading Josephus's /Antiquitates Iudaicae/ is a vastly different experience than watching porn. 

I purposely selected works from a variety of genres...

In order to best... I compiled the following timeline of disability rights movement... There were a couple of inherent challenges to this, the first being the idea of a singular "disability rights movement." For instance, despite being similar in format and released only two years apart, /Caligula/ and /Messalina, Messalina!/ were created in two different countries and thus shaped by different sets of events. The disability rights movement in America was a separate entity from the one going on simultaneously in Italy. However, neither of these movements existed in a vaccuum, and the movements informed and influenced each other. The analysis of these movies in tandem had to acknowledge... without reducing the fight for equality for people with disability down to a single movement with homogeonous, universally understood goals.

/Agrippina/ proved even harder to anaylze through this lens, as disabled voices were rarely elevated or 17th century England, where it was written. And that was only the first level of complication, as George Friedric Handel had spent the first two decades of his life in Germany and then moved to Italy before settling down in England; he and his understanding of disability were not defined by a single culture.

The website component of the project was conceived of very early on. The downside to a completely auditory medium like podcasting was that it did not provide an obvious place for me to share my bibliography - or more accurately, my bibliographies. 

The advisor on my undergraduate thesis, Professor Neel Smith at the College of the Holy Cross, made sure that if I only knew one thing by the time I graduated, it would be how to use GitHub. No matter how much Professor Smith hyped it up, I still found myself wondering if this skill would ever be useful outside of HMT research. Now, faced with the challenge of making a website, I finally had to admit that he was right and I was wrong. Usually I would be loathe to admit this, but the fact that I /actually knew how to do one component of this project/ more than made up for the blow to my ego. 

GitHub soon became the epicenter of everything relating to the podcast. It was where I took notes, wrote scripts, and...

Why Claudius?...I was fully aware that my research was not filling some sort of gap in the collective Classics consciousness. This was not a question that needed to be answered. And that was kind of the point. The stories told about Claudius served as a jumping-off point for the heavier topics I wanted to discuss: disability activism, media literacy, and what it means to be remembered. 

The field of Classics is at an inflection point. After centuries of [...], Classicists are finally reconciling with our field's intrinsic ties to white supremacy...Let's just read some stuff. And watch some stuff. Let's look at this man become a character, and people throughout time repurposing that character in ways that are compatible with their own worldviews. 




