The life of the emperor Claudius was, if nothing else, eventful.

Tiberius Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus was born in Lugdunum, Gaul, on August 1st, 10 BCE, to Drusus the Elder - son of the empress Livia - and Antonia Minor - daughter of Mark Antony. Drusus died shortly after Claudius's birth, leaving Antonia to raise Claudius and his siblings, Germanicus and Livilla, herself. After being singled out as unfit for a political career due to his physical disabilities and speech impediment, Claudius was instead trained to be a historian. 

Whether by the machinations of Agrippina the Younger, or - far more likely - because he was reaching the upper eschelons of age for a Roman man, Claudius died on October 13th, 54 CE. Thus, a very eventful life finally reached its end.

And within a year, another Claudius was born - a fictional Claudius, concocted by Seneca the Younger to make Claudius's successor Nero look good. Before long, even more Claudii were born on the pages of Suetonius and Tacitus and Josephus. Eventually, the principate ended; the reimagining of Claudius did not. Throughout the following centuries and into the modern day, more and more Claudii accumulated, each one tailored to the time period and genre for which he was created.

So, with 2,000 years worth of reimaginings to sift through, I guess we'd better get started.

[musical interlude]

Hello, everyone! Welcome to The Man, the Myth, the Pumpkin, a podcast where we look at fictionalisations of the emperor Claudius' life and ask ourselves, "Why does this exist?" Thank you for joining us for this weird little academic experiment. 

In terms of fictional Claudii, it only seems right to start with the original - Seneca's version, 

The satire which we now know as /Apolokintosis divi Claudii/ - whether or not that was its original title - was attributed to Seneca the Younger by Cassius Dio. 

/[3] Claudius began to give up the ghost, but couldn’t find a way out for it. Then Mercury, who had always had a fancy for his character, led aside one of the three Fates and said: “Why, O hard-hearted woman, do you let the wretched man be tormented? Isn’t he ever to have a rest, after being tortured so long? It is the sixty-fourth year that he has been afflicted with life. What grudge have you got against him and the nation? For once let the prophets tell the truth, who have been taking him off every year, every month even, since he was made emperor. And still it’s no wonder if they go wrong and nobody knows his hour; for nobody ever made any account of his being born. Do what is necessary: ‘Give him over to death: let a better man reign in his place.’”

But Clotho remarked, “I swear I intended to give him a trifle more time, till he should make citizens out of the few that are left outside—for he had made up his mind to see everybody, Greeks, Gauls, Spaniards, Britons, wearing togas. However, since it is perhaps a good thing to have a few foreigners left as a nucleus, and since you wish it, it shall be attended to.” Then she opened a bandbox and brought out three spindles; one was that of Augurinus, the next was Baba’s, the third Claudius’. “I will have these three die at short intervals within a year,” she said, “and not send him off unattended. For it isn’t right that one who has been in the habit of seeing so many thousands of people following him about, going ahead of him, and all around him, should all of a sudden be left alone. For a while he will be satisfied with these boon-companions.”

[4] Thus having spoken she wound up the thread on his spindle neglected,
Breaking off the royal days of his stupid existence./



But Lachesis, who herself, too, had a fondness for the handsomest of men, wrought with generous hand, and bestowed upon Nero many years from her own store. 

I love this line, because - while Seneca could not have known this - Nero did not, in fact, have "many years" left. This also speaks to Seneca's ambition in writing this piece: to survive. He has to please Nero, his former pupil and current boss-slash-emperor, so that Nero doesn't dispose of him and replace him with a better yes-man.

/The news was brought to Jupiter that somebody had come, a rather tall man, quite gray-headed; that he was threatening something or other, for he kept shaking his head; and that he limped with his right foot. The messenger said he had asked of what nation he was, but his answer was mumbled in some kind of an incoherent noise; he didn’t recognize the man’s language, but he wasn’t either Greek or Roman or of any known race. Then Jupiter told Hercules, who had travelled all over the world and was supposed to be acquainted with all the nations, to go and find out what sort of a man it was. Hercules at the first sight was a good deal disturbed, even though he was one who didn’t fear any sort of monsters. When he beheld the aspect of this unknown specimen, its extraordinary gait, its voice belonging to no earthly creature but more like that of the monsters of the deep, hoarse and inarticulate, he thought that a thirteenth labor had come to him. When he looked more carefully, however, it appeared to be a man. He approached him and thus spoke, as was easiest for a Greek chap:

Who and whence art thou, and where are thy city and parents?

Claudius was delighted to find literary people there, hoping there would be some place for his histories. So he, too, in a Homeric verse, indicating himself to be Caesar, said:

Hence from Ilium the winds have among the Cicones cast me.

But the following verse would have been truer, and equally Homeric:

There their city I wasted; the people I slaughtered./

So the drawn-out joke here is that Heracles, fearless hero, is afraid of a man with a limp, tics, and a speech impediment. Uncharacteristically afraid.

/[[Fever] said, “It is simple nonsense that he is giving you. I tell you—I who have lived with him for so many years—he was born at Lugudunum; you behold one of Marcus’ citizens. As I’m telling you, he was born sixteen miles from Vienna, a genuine Gaul. And so as a Gaul ought to do, he captured Rome. Take my word for it, he was born at Lugudunum, where Licinus reigned for many years. But you, who have tramped more lands than any wandering muleteer, ought to know men from Lugudunum and that there are a good many miles between the Xanthus and the Rhone.”

Claudius was born outside of Lugdunum, to none other than /Livia's son,/ who was on a military campaign at the time. If the Claudians were some nobody family from Lugdunum, then Nero, being Claudius's great-nephew, stepson, and adopted son, had an equally tenuous claim to leadership.

/Then the divine Augustus arose at the point for expressing his opinion, and discoursed with the utmost eloquence. “I call you to witness, Conscript Fathers,” said he, “that since I was made a god, I have never addressed you; I always mind my own business. And I can no longer disguise my feelings nor conceal the distress that shame makes all the greater. Was it for this that I secured peace on land and sea? For this did I make an end of civil wars? For this did I found the city on a basis of law, adorn it with monuments, that—what to say, Conscript Fathers, I cannot discover. All words are beneath my indignation. So in desperation I must take to the phrase of that most clever man, Messala Corvinus, ‘I am ashamed of my authority.’ This fellow, Conscript Fathers, who doesn’t seem to you as if he could disturb a fly, used to kill people as easily as a dog stops to rest. But why should I enumerate the many great men? I have no heart to lament public calamities when I behold those of my own family. 

Here, Seneca has his cake and eats it too. Claudius is weak, and that is bad; but he's also violent and angry, and that is equally bad. He is terrifying through both his impotence and his ability. 


/Suddenly C. Caesar appeared and began to claim him as a slave. He produced witnesses who had seen Claudius getting thrashed by him with whips, with rods, and with his fists. The man was adjudged to C. Caesar; Caesar presented him to Aeacus; the latter delivered him to Menander his freedman, to be his law-clerk./

The story ends abruptly, with Claudius becoming first the slave to Caligula and then the law-clerk to Menander, his own freedman. 

"But wait," you say, "this story is named after pumpkins! And this /podcast/ is named after this story which is named after pumpkins! Where were the pumpkins?" 

And I'm glad you asked, because the title of this work worth examining. First of all, the title /Apolokintosis divi Claudii/ comes to us from Cassius Dio, which explains why this Latin satire has a partially Greek name. Apolokintosis is a combination of the words apotheosis, which means ascention to godhood, and kolokynt, which means - say it with me, everyone - gourd. Neither Seneca nor Cassius Dio knew what a pumpkin was. Dio even glosses this title, implying that his audience would not have necessarily understood the joke off the bat. And even after the gloss, the audience still might not have gotten it. It's not like kolokynt was a common insult. And scholars hypothesize that this might have been the point: the title is as unexpected and /wrong/ as Claudius's time as emperor. 

The common English translation as "pumpkinification" wouldn't come until centuries later, after Europeans learned that pumpkins existed. 


