"I'm not the sort of person who wins."

Claudius's first appearance has him out of money, just returning from a round of drinking and gambling, rambling about how he doesn't believe in dreams until Augustus tells him to go away.

"Your family always turn out well, my dear."
"Yes, all except one."
"Sorry."
"Claudius is always apologizing for being my brother."

"If you go to Telemon, you can go to see Agrippa Posthumus. It's not far, and after all he is your grandson, your only grandson still alive. I've always wondered, the rest of us are just stepsons...Sorry I've had too much to drink."
"Well, your heart is softer than mine. No, I will not see my grandson."

Agrippa Postumus is an ass. "WHO IS THE EMPEROR'S GRANDSON, ME OR YOU?" He's also a drunk. "I can't meet [Augustus] with a hangover like this!" And then he threatens to kill a guard. 

Augustus sees Agrippa Postumus! "I believed I'd never see you again."
"Nor I. But I changed my mind."
"Why?"
"I'm nearly seventy-six. I don't have much time left for changing my mind."

"We Octavians are a new family, middle-class. Not great hereditary aristocrats like Livia and Tiberius. We have to be careful for the first hundred years."

"I think to be an emperor you have to be physically robust." - Agrippa is fucking weird. 

The parallels between Claudius and Agrippa Postumus are fascinating. Agrippa has nothing to do, so he becomes destructive and gets himself exiled. Claudius has nothing to do, and he becomes self-destructive by drinking and gambling, becoming ostracized even further from his family. 

Interestingly, Agrippa says that if he ascends to power, the first thing he would do is kill the guard who has been watching over him to make an example, that the family of Augustus must be respected. And when Claudius ascends to power? He has to put those who conspired against Caligula to death, to make an example. 

"You...arrange everything, don't you?"
"I arrange most things."
"Uncle, give me a job!"
"Because I'm your uncle?"
"I don't care about reasons! Look at my brother, Germanicus! He's only four years older than I am, and he's already been a consul, and now he's commanding an army! I have never been allowed to do anything!"
"Germanicus was favored by the emperor. I am not emperor. I cannot give jobs."
"Oh...Well that's just a constitutional ??? isn't it? Keeping up the pretense that you're not emperor until the senate forces the title onto you, whether you want it or not."
"I am in fact unwilling."
"You're a very clever man. I'm not sure I like you, but I do admire you enormously."
"I'm tired of being admired. And even more tired of being clever."
"But when you're clever you can't ever stop, can you? I mean, you just naturally go on thinking about how one thing combines with another? How one move can serve two purposes?"
"Claudius, I shall arrange for the consular regalia to be delivered to your house."
"The regalia."
"Yes."
"But not the job."
"Only the toys of office. They may help to keep you amused."
"But all the same-"
"Goodbye, Claudius."
"I know that Germanicus is brave and handsome. And I'm a coward. And...but actually, I am more sensible than he is... If I had been in his job, you wouldn't have had any mutiny." Claudius peeks behind the door before finishing his sentence, and finishes the rest perfectly, without any stuttering. It's actually jarring. Tiberius, who was dead set on ignoring Claudius, looks up in surprise just in time to see Claudius duck out of the room. 


"Claudius. It is reported to me that you spend your time drinking and gambling with slaves. Is it true?"
"Not slaves."
"Hired servants, then."
"All sorts! Do you want to know why?"
"Why is self-justification. I never want to know why."
"Well, it if you give me something to do..."
"Are you drunk now?"
"Yes. If you give me something to do-"
"You already have something to be. That's more than most people."
"A member of the royal family?"
"Of Augustus's family."
"Am I a disgrace?"
"You're worse. You're a laughing stock."
"Well, why not? Every family has one, why not ours? Well, they've got enough to admire: you being so clever, and Germanicus, brave and handsome, and whatever else there is."
"I am concerned with the business of good government. Government cannot work unless the rulers are respected. And the people close to them."
"You don't think rulers should be loved? Make us human with human weaknesses?"
"Love is not necessary; respect is."
"Have you ever loved anyone?"
"Not recently."
"What must I do to be respected?"
"Retire to your country villa for a time."
"Out of sight."
"You're my nephew, it's too close for comfort."
"And the brother to your successor."
"Yes."
"Will he? I mean, succeed you?"
"Germanicus is my heir."
"But will you let him?"
"When he has learned."
"Do you think he will ever learn?"
"I think he's in the process of learning."

The difference between Claudius's relationship with Germanicus is staggering. In /The Caesars/, Germanicus's struggle to put down the mutiny following Augustus's death is highlighted. Claudius, vocally jealous of his brother...

"Hail, Germanicus!"
"Hail, brother!" 
Claudius drunkenly takes the laurel wreath off of Germanicus's head and puts it on his own. Talk about foreshadowing. 

"[Germanicus] is also the darling of Rome."
"Well they only love him because he's pretty."
"...It is useful for a ruler to be loved." Tiberius echoes Claudius's advice back to Livia!!
"You don't want that ninny on the throne of Rome!...Send him back to Germany, let him get himself killed.

[crying] "You...standing in your chariot...THey wouldn't even let me serve in the army!"
"Poor Claudius."
"When you're emperor, will you let me serve in the army?"
"We'll see."
"No, promise!"
"Awww, what's he begging for this time?" - Livilla
"Stop it!"
"Awww, let me guess. You want a triumph too! C-C-C-Claudius wants a triumph."
"Bitch!"
"You can't even hold a sword!"
"I can! [turns to Germanicus] You've seen me exercising!"
Germanicus just walks away and asks for more wine.

places the laurel wreath back on Germanicus's head.
"Agrippina. I apoligize for behaving so badly."
"You were not the worst."
"Someone was worst than...who?"
"Drusus."
"Oh, that's understandable."
"Is it?"
"Well, emperor's only son, but he won't inherit the empire. 'Cause it's all going to Germanicus, just as the divine Augustus ordered."
"Go home, Claudius. Go to sleep."
"It's much the same with me, you know."
"Good night."
"Nothing to do, nothing to look forward to." [collapses. two men catch him] "They won't make me a consul, or a general, because I don't look it. It's all a question of looking. He's my brother, but Germanicus is not much good as a general. He just looks it, that's all. Hmm?" [drunkenly kisses one of the men on the cheek] "He just looks it, that's all!"

Tiberius is equally as distrustful of Germanicus's skill as a general, as is shown in the next scene. 

"Germanicus wrote to me too."
"Saying he was ill."
"And to dismiss ???"
"Have you replied?"
"I replied that I would review the situation after his recovery."
"Did you read his last paragraph?"
"Yes."
"About magic?"
"His mind was wandering!"
"Yes, but if Germanicus believes it-"
"Then he's a fool-"
"Yes but if Germanicus thinks-"
"Claudius, we are two sensible men. Science exists, magic does not."
"Well, but if Germanicus thinks it does, even though it doesn't, people can make their illnesses worse by imagining things."
"Germanicus has a fever - had a fever, a month ago. By now he's recovered."
"Does [///] say that? I mean, he can read the future. Can he read what's happening now?"
"[///] is not being as explicit as usual."

Interesting parallel - Claudius is always said to be controlled by his wives, but Agrippina is in control of Germanicus.

"If you love me - not for my rank, but for myself - avenge me." - Germanicus as he dies.

"No state funeral?"
"No."
"Is that wise? I mean, I know you're always wise, but they expect it."
"Who are they?"
"The people I talk to. People. In the street."
"Germanicus was a Roman soldier who died on active duty. The ceremony will be simple."
"But he was a member of the imperial family!"
"It's observing dignified moderation, even in grief."
"Tiberius, are you yourself?"
"Be quiet, Claudius! You've said enough!" - Agrippina
"Are you and Grandmother Livia attending the ceremony?"
"Livia shall do what she thinks best."
"I shall mourn in private." - Livia
"So shall I." - Tiberius

"Poor Agrippina. You're Augustus's own blood and the direct line. Is it very frustrating no longer to be the next empress?
"I loved Germanicus."
"Yes. Everyone tells me he had the quality of being loveable."
"And I will see him avenged whether you want it or not."
"My wants do not enter into it." Yet again, Tiberius and the theme of love.

"What is important is to make people believe the matter of the succession is settled."
"When in fact it is not."
"The fact is unimportant, what matters is the belief." Yet again, Tiberius takes Claudius's advice!

"Sejanus my cousin Claudius informs me that he is not saluted by the praetorian guard. That is so, Claudius?"
"...It's not important."
"That is so?"
"...Yes."
"Is it on your orders?"
"The list of whom honors are paid is selective."
"Claudius is a member of the imperial family."
"That is not enough in itself."
//
"Some of us rise by merit."
"And some by trickery."
"And some by nothing at all."
Drusus bitch slaps Sejanus in this scene. 

"No worthless golden statues? Are you trying to undermine Sejanus? I hope so."
"The emperor has a great gift for saying things that could mean this or could mean that."
A majority of Claudius's scenes are drunk. [I should go through and count.] That doesn't stop him from saying insightful things nearly every time he shows up.

"Send a message to Livilla she would do best to kill herself."
Claudius approaches Tiberius, realizes that he can't say anything that would make the situation better, and leaves.

"Not poor. I mean, I see the point. Dying, instead of going on just surviving."
"Would you have done it, Uncle Claudius?"
"No. I'm not that sort of person. I just try to...survive."
Agrippina's resistence to being forcefed during her attempt to starve herself to death is badass. "The emperor's will is not as strong as mine." 

Tiberius insists on giving a "defense" when his oldest friend decides he cannot be Tiberius's friend anymore, and to starve himself to death. He explains his actions, when years ago he told Claudius that he is not interested in hearing people do so. Another subtle win for Claudius.

"Augustus in his heyday killed far more than that."
"Without remembering the other."
"He could do that and still seem innocent, and still be loved..."
"I have lacked the ability to charm. Is that the fault?"
Once again, two themes brought up by Claudius come back.

Caligula 15:37

"Claudius, what is it you want most in the world?"
"I think I should like to retire to my house in the country."
"Claudius, that is not what you want. I know better than you."
After all that Tiberius learned from Claudius, Claudius has finally learned what Tiberius was getting at at the beginning of his reign - that it's better to just be in retirement than to hold office. But just as Claudius has finally concluded his character arc, Caligula says nope and forces him into power when he has grown past wanting it. 









