You may have noticed that, right by the title and cover art for this podcast, there's a tag that says explicit. And honestly, that probably seems a bit redundant. When talking about history - and especially the history of imperial Rome - sex, death, and violence are par for the course. And since sex, death. and violence are also common themes in 1970s sexploitation films, I guess it was inevitable that the two topics would overlap eventually. 

First thing's first: the existence of Classics porn - especially violent, racy Classics-themed fetish porn - feels weird. And the typical scholarly response to me saying that would be a blunt "get over it," I think it's important to explore /why/ it feels so weird. So, for this episode we find ourselves in the late 1970s. The topic of ancient Rome is still a class signifier in Europe and America, but the peplum films of the 1950s have increased the appeal beyond the ivory tower. The other part of this equation - porn - is still heavily stigmatized but gaining mainstream relevance. So, when we identify that "weird" feeling, what we're actually feeling is the tension between something socially [venerated] and something taboo. The audience for porn and the audience for stories about Rome are not supposed to overlap, because the former is low class and the latter is high class. 

Since this is such an odd combination, it probably seems especially weird that two Julio-Claudian sexploitation films were released within two years of each other. I should probably mention that they are at least partially connected. While /Caligula/ was finished first, several lawsuits prevented it from being released. Enter the production team of /Messalina, Messalina!/, who decided to make use of /Caligula/'s sets. Again, I want to emphasize that these films were produced by two different teams. That means two sets of people in the film industry separately came to the conclusion that Claudius porn was a good idea. And as weird as that is, it's also interesting. Why was this a story that filmmakers in the late seventies were so intent on telling?

First, a rundown of both films. /Caligula/, which obviously takes place first, follows the titular emperor's desent from mild perversion to complete corruption and his assassination by the praetorian guard. Despite Claudius the historical figure having been politically active throughout Caligula's reign, Claudius the character does not show up until the very end, when he is unwillingly made emperor a la /Antiquities of the Jews/.

/Messalina, Messalina!/ picks back up a few years later, during Claudius's expedition to Ostia in 62 CE. The "plot" consists of Messalina seeking power by sleeping with various people, until Claudius shows up at the end and puts everyone to death in an extended, gratuitious gore scene.

Now, just from these descriptions alone we can see an important parallel: in both movies, Claudius does not appear until the end. More specifically, Claudius only appears at the tail end of a taboo sexcapade put to an end by violence - in one case his own violence, in the other the violence of a third party. In both of these films about sex, Claudius's appearance marks that the sex, and what is encapsulated by the sex - the perversion, the corruption - has come to an end. 

In /Messalina, Messalina!/, every character engaging in sex is able-bodied. In /Caligula/, there actually is a depiction of disabled people having sex - a fetishistic, disgusting depiction. In the film, Tiberius has a "human zoo" filled with people with various disabilities and birth defects. Picture a Victorian sideshow, but everyone is having sex for the benefit of one extremely powerful, extremely perverted old man. The orgy in the human zoo is portrayed as part of a chain of debauchery, proceeded by Caligula's incest with his sister and Tiberius bathing with his "little fish." Like incest and borderline-pedophilia, the human zoo orgy is supposed to be erotic by virtue of being taboo. That's worth repeating: /sexual relations between people with disabilities/ is framed as being erotic by being "so wrong that it's right." It's an inversion of what society considers correct. 

That in and of itself is an ugly thought. But did the filmmaker's assumption, that sex between disabled people would be received as "so wrong that it's right", actually play out with his audience? 

The other massive variable that these films play with is gender. In /Caligula/, Claudius is de-sexed by being literally excluded from the sex. /Messalina, Messalina/ takes this theme even further, by focusing on Messalina continually cheating on and, as a result, immasculating Claudius without his knowledge. As we've discussed...this Roman idea that to be masculine is to be in control, both of yourself and of those around you. To be subjugated to forces that are more powerful than you is inherently feminizing. And the only thing more emasculating than losing control of your wife is for said wife to commandeer your political power.

...Which leads us to the bloodbath scene. You know what a great way to exert control is? Violence... It is especially interesting for Claudius to be leading the charge here, as he was deprived of the opportunity to prove his masculinity through war in his youth. And at the bizarre crossroads of imperial Rome and sexploitation films, we find ourselves at another crossroads: the place where disability and gender intersect. 

So in the end, Claudius reclaims his manhood and Rome is saved from having a sexually [empowered] woman make political decisions. Nice.

So, let's talk about that nifty "audience reception" thing, which we've started having access to as our sources have gotten more recent. Remember all that legal trouble that /Caligula/ got in, allowing for /Messalina, Messalina/ to be made? It's okay if you don't, you've been inundated with a whole lot of insanity since the beginning of the episode. Anyway...

