It is disturbingly easy to break your life down into story beats.

If you were asked to, it would probably take you a matter of minutes to sift through every experience that you remember, separating what's useful from what's not. Not just that, but you could spin your life into /several/ stories - each with a different set of events, sometimes overlapping but framed in different ways, conveying a different mood and serving a different purpose. The same memory could be a comedic vignette in one story and a meaningful turning point in another. The absolute crux of one story might not even /appear/ in another.

Now imagine spinning stories out of a life you've only heard about /in stories/ - I know, I'm asking you to imagine the entire genre of historical fiction, but bear with me here. Not only would you have to choose which moments to include in your retelling, but whether to keep the pre-attached framing from a previous retelling.

And now, finally, imagine trying to do this all about a life that was, at the very least, uncommonly eventful, and probably a bit closer to batshit insane. We're talking violence, political intruige, and intergenerational incest. But with so much there, and a whole tradition of stories to remix and reframe, how many ways do you think you could spin that?

[musical interlude]

Hello, everyone! Welcome to The Man, the Myth, the Pumpkin, a podcast where we look at fictionalisations of the emperor Claudius' life and ask ourselves, "Why does this exist?" My name is Sophia Sarro, and thank you for joining me for this weird little academic experiment. 

First of all, I should probably start off with some historical context or this is gonna sound a whole lot weirder than it already is. Tiberius Claudius Nero Germanicus, who would later become Tiberius Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus, was born in 10 BCE. His father Drusus was the son of the empress Livia, and his mother Antonia Minor was the niece of the emperor Augustus, meaning Claudius would be raised as part of imperial Rome's first dynastic family. 

Whereas most Julio-Claudian boys were raised for military and political careers, Claudius was counted out of those career paths from an early age due to his limp, physical tics, and significant hearing loss, as well as speaking with a stutter. He was instead trained to be a historian. That did not stop him from seeking political office during the reigns of his grandfather Augustus and uncle Tiberius though - although the varying success of these bids led to him going into an early retirement and spending a considerable amount of his time gambling.

During Caligula's reign, he brought his uncle Claudius out of political retirement and appointed him co-consul. And when Caligula was assassinated, his co-consul was a clear contender for his successor. It took a lot of bribes, and the merciless execution of some conspiritors, but the Julio-Claudians' power was restored as Claudius was declared emperor.

Speedrun of his reign: Aqueducts were built. Rome conquered Brittania. Claudius put his own wife, Valeria Messalina, to death after she was /allegedly/ plotting to overthrow him. He proposed two new letters of the Latin alphabet; they didn't catch on. And in 54 CE, he died after naming his stepson Nero as his political heir.

I cannot emphasize this enough: it is /HARD/ to condense sixty-four years into a matter of seconds. But now that you have my slapdash version of Claudius's life, you're ready for Seneca the Younger's far more thought-out rendition of his /afterlife/. Let's talk Apokolokintosis. 

[musical interlude]

Apokolokintosis is a Roman satire attributed to Seneca the Younger by Cassius Dio. The title comes from Dio, who wrote in Greek - it's a portmanteau of apotheosis, the ancient Greek word for ascension to godhood, and kolokynth, the ancient Greek word for gourd - or, as it's more often translated now, pumpkin. The implication of the title is that after his death, when Claudius is deified by the senate, he turns into a gourd instead. If you think it's a weird title, scholars agree. It's not like "kolokynth" was a common insult or anything. But that's the title we're stuck with, so we might as well go with it.

Compared to whatever the title is supposed to be, the plot is fairly simple.

Claudius  dies and ascends to heaven, where he promptly terrifies Hercules just by showing up. He attempts to smooth-talk the gods into letting him stay in heaven, but when the gods are voting on whether or not he should become a god, Augustus cuts in and tells everyone what a horrible person he was. He's then sent to the lower, far less pleasurable parts of the underworld, where the people who were put to death during his reign cheer that he's finally dead. Seeing people that he knew in life, Claudius rejoices in the fact that he's surrounded by friends. He could not be more wrong. When he's put on trial for killing literally countless people, the inhabitants of the underworld decide that he is worthy of the worst imaginable punishment - which, for a gambling addict, is spending an eternity with a bottomless dice box that won't actually let him throw his dice. Within the last few sentences of the story, Caligula swoops in, claims him, and gives him as a gift to Aecus, who passes him off again to Menander, who uses him as his law clerk. It's a very eventful last three lines.

So, let's talk about the grand, overarching theme here: everyone hates Claudius. Claudius's own late grandfather hates Claudius. The gods, after Augustus exposes him for what he is, hates Claudius. The people in the less favorable part of the underworld, especially those he put to death, /DESPISE/ Claudius. And within the story, everyone has a well-established reason to do so. At least Hercules has mixed feelings towards him - unfortunately for Claudius, the mix is between hatred and fear. 

Hercules is a special case too, because while some of the gods were willing to give him the benefit of the doubt prior to Augustus's speech, Hercules hates him right from the get-go. To a modern audience, the joke is as obvious as it is unfunny: someone known for his strength, virility, and nigh-invincibility is afraid of someone who couldn’t pose a threat to him if he tried - without any underlings to assassinate people for him, that is. It’s the old lion-afraid-of-a-mouse trope, just as shallow here as it is in any children’s cartoon - or so I thought. But when you think of Hercules as the /pinnacle/ of virility, repulsed by the physically disabled and morally deplorable Claudius, things get a lot more interesting. Hercules is afraid of Claudius before he even hears of his crimes, strictly because of his physical disabilities - or more accurately, his lack of control. Claudius is not in full control of his physical tics, or the way that he walks, and that, to Hercules, is horrifying.

The intersection between Classical studies and disability studies has been booming lately, and it’s a bit late but we can still give the obligatory round of applause. And of course, being one of the most famous people in the ancient world - and thus, one of the people we know most about - Claudius has been at the forefront of many of these discussions. Personally, I want to give Classicists the benefit of the doubt here - that we’re talking the most about him because he’s one of the most well-attested physically disabled people in both the literary and archaeological records, and not because he was rich and poor people are boring. Because he was so far removed from the average Roman, his relationship with disability must likewise be understood to be different than that of someone who wasn’t emperor. And because each retelling of his life - or afterlife - is written with a different goal in mind, the presentation of disability between sources will obviously differ.

So, Claudius does not have full control over his body, and Hercules, whose entire /thing/ is having exemplary control of his body and doing heroic things with it, doesn't like that. Cool. Easy. Where's the cool part. The cool part is that control over oneself and others is not just a Roman ideal, it's a /masculine/ Roman ideal. On the spectrum of Roman gender, it was freeborn Roman men - who had the most control of their own lives, and the most potential to control others' - that were viewed as the most masculine. Meaning, Hercules is shuddering not only at the sight of a disabled person, but at the gaping vacuum standing in place of Roman masculinity. 

Once you realise that, it's easy to see that the only male characters who tolerate Claudius are those who stand to gain from him. Mercury begs Clotho to cut Claudius's life short - because yeah, Seneca leans into the idea that dying is better than living while disabled - because [Claudius made grand sacrifices...]

Caligula claims him in order to use him. He even outright claims that Claudius was his [slave] - his slave - during life. This blow to his agency is particularly damning because being Caligula’s co-consul was Claudius's most notable political stint prior to being emperor, and in spite of it not being a particularly glamorous or gratifying job - Suetonius tells of Caligula throwing him in a river at one point, and whether or not that actually happened it gets the point across - this could very easily be framed as Claudius regaining some measure of control in his life. That makes the inversion here - portraying it as enslavement - a particularly cruel jab.

We also have Menander, a freedman whose control is undercut by his previous enslavement. I do not have to explain why the Roman emperor working /for/ a freedman would be seen by the Romans as something so unthinkable, it could only appear in satire.

And in the living world, people are definitely mourning him. But as Clotho said at the start of the story, Claudius had granted Roman citizenship to pretty much everyone in the known world, and probably would have finished the job if given a few more years of life. The people mourning him /also/ gained from him, and are mourning the lack of services to come as much as they're mourning the man himself - the man who they don't really know, and whose atrocities haven't been spelled out for them. There's also a short bit about the lowest-ranking lawyers mourning his death, as the /real/ lawyers - and thus, lawful order for Rome - have reemerged after Claudius's death. These are the men who benefitted from Claudius's corruption, and they too are mourning that their days of privelege have come to an end.

So, who is Claudius in this piece? He's out of control both physically and morally. The only people who tolerate him do so not for who he is, but what he can offer them. He is at his best when serving his social inferiors, and borders on monsterous when enacting his own desires. He is a failed leader and a failed man.

[musical interlude]

And then we have this conspicuous line, near the beginning of the story: cue line about Nero being young and handsome.

Oh, and since we’re back to Nero, it might be time to ask ourselves why this exists. After all, Seneca is writing under Nero - possibly writing this particular satire for the first Saturnalia during Nero’s reign - and it doesn’t seem particularly conducive to claim that the one who named the current leader as his successor - who also happened to be said leader’s great-uncle, stepfather, /and/ father-in-law - was some effeminate Gaul with a godawful temper. And that’s why it’s theorised that this was written for Saturnalia - because inversions like this, and poking fun at the people you were supposed to revere, was part of the holiday.

But it also serves a secondary purpose, setting Nero up as the leader who will bring Roman masculinity back into the political sphere. (With the benefit of hindsight, we can say that it’s good that Seneca only mentioned Nero in passing, as he would otherwise risk undermining his own goal.)


"But wait," you say, "this story is named after pumpkins! And this /podcast/ is named after this story which is named after pumpkins! You're telling me we get one dice box shaped like a gourd flower at the very beginning, and then nothing? Where are the pumpkins?"

So, there are two theories about that. The first, and longest-standing theory, is shich was put forth by [name]

And I'm glad you asked, because the title of this work worth examining. First of all, the title /Apolokintosis divi Claudii/ comes to us from Cassius Dio, which explains why this Latin satire has a partially Greek name. Apolokintosis is a combination of the words apotheosis, which means ascention to godhood, and kolokynt, which means - say it with me, everyone - gourd. Dio even glosses this title, implying that his audience would not have necessarily understood the joke off the bat. And even after the gloss, the audience still might not have gotten it. It's not like kolokynt was a common insult. And scholars hypothesize that this might have been the point: the title is as unexpected and /wrong/ as Claudius's time as emperor. 

And of course, the common English translation "pumpkinification" came about centuries later, after Europeans learned that squash existed. The title isn't static. This title has an ambiguous meaning that continues to change depending on its cultural context. If that doesn't sum up the material we're dealing with, I don't know what does. 
