Agrippina by George Friedrich Handel (1709)

Why Early Opera is Roman and Not Greek
Smith, J. (1969). Carlo Pallavicino. Proceedings of the Royal Musical Association, 96, 57-71. doi:10.1093/jrma/96.1.57
Heller, Wendy. Emblems of Eloquence: Opera and Women’s Voices in seventeenth-century Venice. Univ of California Press, 2003.
Heller, W. (1993). The queen as king: Refashioning Semiramide for Seicento Venice. Cambridge Opera Journal, 5(2), 93-114. doi:10.1017/S0954586700003931
From a God to a Servant: The Bass Voice in Seventeenth-Century Venetian Opera
Operatic Characters and Voice Type
The Castrati as a Professional Group and a Social Phenomenon, 1550-1850
André, Naomi Adele. Voicing gender: castrati, travesti, and the second woman in early-nineteenth-century Italian opera. Indiana University Press, 2006.
Sawyer, John E. “Irony and Borrowing in Handel’s ‘Agrippina.’” Music & Letters 80, no. 4 (1999): 531–59. http://www.jstor.org/stable/854988.
Vagramian-Nashanian, Violet. "Handel's Agrippina: A Masterpiece." The American Music Teacher 35, no. 2 (1985): 29.
COULARDEAU, Jacques, Ivan EVE, and Annunzio COULARDEAU. "HANDEL'S AGRIPPINA MODERN INTERPRETATIONS AND THE ROLE OF COUNTERTENORS [Format Kindle]." (2019).
van Zyl Smit, Betine. "Agrippina as prima donna: The reception of Agrippina, mother of Nero, in Handel’s opera Agrippina." In die Skriflig 53, no. 2 (2019): 1-6.
Kim, Hyun Joo. "Grimani and Handel’s Responses to Arcadian Reform in the Opera Agrippina."Olivieri, Guido. 
"Handel's Italian Muse." Early Music America 19, no. 1 (2013): 20.

/Agrippina/ was composed by George Frideric Handel, with libretto - the talking part of an opera - by Cardinal Vincenzo Grimani. The opera was written for Venice's Carnevale, a raucous pre-Lent celebration marked by parades, costumes, and social inversions. Fittingly for that kind of celebration, Handel and Vincenzo came out with an amoral, ahistorical satire that turned the well-known story of Agrippina and Nero on its head.

The story goes like this: Upon hearing that Claudius has died, Agrippina pushes for Nero to become the next princeps - to Nero's reluctant acceptance. Just as Nero is about to be crowned, everyone learns that Claudius has actually survived thanks to the intervention of Otho, who Claudius has named as his heir as thanks for saving his life. 

Otho, in a moment of lapsed judgement, tells the famously crafty Agrippina that he is in love with Poppaea Sabina, the beautiful Pompeiian woman who has unintentionally captured the hearts of both Nero and Claudius as well. Agrippina then approaches Poppaea and tells her the exact opposite - that Otho said he'd let Claudius pursue her in exchange for being named heir. She suggests that if Poppaea wants to get even, she should trick Claudius into thinking Otho didn't intend to hold up his end of the deal. Poppaea follows Agrippina's advice.

Everyone publically rejects Otho after this. His despair motivates Poppaea to make up with him, and his sincere confusion sparks doubt that he actually struck that deal in the first place. Poppaea carries out a scheme to clue Otho in on what's going on and bait him into professing his innocence. The two lovebirds reconcile and are now poised to expose Agrippina's scheming - until Nero bursts in and declares his love for Poppaea. But that's no problem for the clever Poppaea, who tricks Nero into attempting to win her over right in front of Claudius. Nero learns from this experience that love has nothing on power, and announces to Agrippina that he is now going to focus on ascending to power like she wanted him to. Meanwhile, Pallas and Narcissus, who Agrippina tasked with killing both Otho and /each other/, see through Agrippina's deceit and tell Claudius what's been going on. He confronts Agrippina, who tells him that on the contrary, she was actually making sure that the trone would remain /his/. Somehow, he believes this, and decides to grant everyone what he believes, based on what he has seen so far, would make them happy - he reinstates Otho as his heir, and declares that Nero will get to marry Poppaea. Once he learns that he missed out on /a lot/, he reverses the decision so that Nero will get the throne and Otho will get to marry Poppaea. The opera ends with him summoning Juno from on high to bless everyone.

Now, that was pretty long for a summary - even a summary of a nearly three hour opera. And if you're wondering, "Did we really need all that?" I would argue that yes, we did, because the pushes and pulls of characters imposing their contradictory wills are the driving force of this story. This is an interesting cast of characters through which to explore the concepts of agency and control, and Grimani takes full advantage of that. 

The man who has the most political power - Claudius - has the least power to change the narrative, whereas the man with the most narrative power - Otho - relinquishes that same political power to bring closure to the narrative. Before the narrative even starts, Otho kicks off the chain of events by saving Claudius's life, thus preventing Nero from ascending to power as Agrippina had hoped. When he first apears on stage, Agrippina, Narcissus, Pallas, and Nero all say in unison, "Here comes the main cause of my affliction." Otho is a /cause/ - he's an active agent. Likewise, by being unspeakably - but kind of endearingly - naive and choosing to tell Agrippina of all people about his love life, Otho gives her the information she needs to concoct a scheme and push the plot even further. And once he Poppaea lets him know what's going on, he follows her lead in terms of carrying out her clever schemes.

Claudius, meanwhile, is more of an obstacle to get around. Even when Claudius exerts his power and grants everyone a happy ending, he is merely doing what the others have led him to do through their schemes. And the biggest display of power within the entire opera, calling down a literal goddess to bless everyone, has effectively no bearing on the plot because everything has already been resolved.

It should also be noted that for the male characters, narrative impotence and sexual imptence are entwined. Otho is able to unwittingly sway the narrative because he is the young, sexually viable contralto who has to end up with the young, sexually viable soprano Poppaea in order for the structure of the opera to make sense - both within the narrative and outside of it, Otho's actions are affected by factors he couldn't possibly know about. 

Claudius comes dangerously close to taking the narrative in a completely different direction when he is alone with Poppaea. He almost rips her own agency away from her by presuming he knows what she wants and getting it horrifically wrong, exclaiming, "I understand! A chaste woman sometimes wants the excuse that she is taken by force. Do not fight me off, my heart!" He is prevented from raping Poppaea by both his own dallying and his own wife, giving Agrippina just enough time to arrive and prevent the rape from taking place. Claudius tries once again to enact his own agency, ordering the enslaved Lesbus to lock the door so that he doesn't have to stop what he's doing, but it's Poppaea who gives him the order to, "Leave, sir, if you love me." And that brings up another interesting point about agency: while Otho kind of stumbles around, unsure of how to weild his agency, Poppaea and Agrippina weild theirs far more competently, both posessing a far clearer picture of what's going on. In this scene, Poppaea has to balance two competing objectives: carrying out Agrippina's plan, which involves feigning affection for Claudius, and preventing Claudius from actually acting on said affection, for her own sake. Through her frequent asides, she makes it clear to the audience how difficult it is to juggle the two, adding tension to the scene. But she does it! She convinces Claudius of her affection but also convinces him to get the hell out of the room, proving herself to be just as quick-thinking and cunning as Agrippina.

And given that it's Agrippina's scheme that turns Otho's act of valor into the mess it becomes, and that she's willing to sacrifice the lives of Otho and Pallas and/or Narcissus to get what she wants, I don't have to tell you that the titular character enacts her own agency in spades. And while her will often runs contrary to the wills of Poppaea and Otho, leading her to take advantage of them and sacrifice their well-being for her own, she is still on the team that the audience is rooting for - the team of everyone who has to navigate around the massive obstacle that is Claudius. 

When ancient historians accused these women of the heinous crime of enacting their own agency, they both ended up dead at the hands of Nero. And if you're wondering why I'm invoking the historians and not just history, you have to understand, these were the same historians who suggested that Claudius died of poisoined mushroom instead of, you know, being old, and that Augustus died of poisoned figs instead of, /you know, being old./ Even the sources we go to for historical fact are susceptible to bias and liable to listen to rumors, especially if those rumors help to prove that clever women are dangerous. But here, the clever women receive their respective rewards at the end, with Poppaea ending up with Otho and Agrippina getting her son installed as heir. And it's not like the story treats the women as if what they're doing is moral - Poppaea, in particular, has plenty of asides in which she calls herself out for dishonesty. But by doing so in the midst of the Carnevale season, Handel and Grimani could inspire their audience to think of amoral people in power without calling them out outright and upsetting anyone above them. This was especially important for Grimani, a Cardinal who was at odds with his superior, Pope Clement the Eleventh. If he could hint to the public that the person at the top - in this case, Claudius - is clueless as to what anyone below him wants or needs, and wouldn't get anything done without those below him acting /around/ and /in spite of/ him, he could make a general enough statement which still reflected his current plight, without saying "this pope is trash."

But what actually was his current plight? For all of the ink that's been spilled on /Agrippina/, that detail - and pretty much every other detail of Grimani's life - was surprisingly hard to find. I guess that's because the details of opera and warfare don't usually end up in the same books. You see, the Habsburg dynasty, who had given Grimani his position as Cardinal, were going through a particularly tough time in the early eighteenth century. After Charles II died without an heir, the dynasty became embroiled in the War of Spanish Succession. As Philip of Anjou and Charles of Austria vied to fill the power vacuum, they dragged Spain, Austria, France, Britain, the Dutch Republic, and Savoy into the conflict with them. The war between Catholic powers put considerable strain on Pope Clement XI, who strove to maintain neutrality for the Papal States and not to show favor to either side of the conflict. Resultingly, critics of Pope Clement painted him as ineffective and indecisive, having more power than anyone else to potentially end the conflict but refusing to do so. And if you owed your position in life to the Habsburgs, like Vincenzo Grimani, you would probably be alarmed that the person with the most power was seemingly sitting back and watching them tear themselves apart. 

A lot of things seems clearer now, don't they? Particularly, why Handel and Grimani chose to write about an ineffective leader who gets tossed around at the whims of those around him, instead of enacting his own agency and stopping any conflict in its tracks. 

Out of all the tweaks and outright retcons to the historical narrative, there's one in particular that I'd like to draw your attention to: this version of Claudius is notably without his stutter, and no one mocks or even mentions his physical disabilities. I think this is for political reasons - Handel and Grimani want the most politically powerful figure in the story to be undercut not by anything beyond his control, but by his inability to see what is going on in front of him and act accordingly, which he could probably do if he actually bothered to pay attention. This makes a stronger case against other powerful figures that Claudius could represent - (cough) Pope Clement - that any reason for him being ineffective and disliked is due to his own choices.

But while we don't find ourselves at the intersection between ability and gender, we /do/ find ourselves at the intersection between /agency/ and gender. The characters who act with the most forethought, and thus get what closer to what they want through the choices they make, are female. And while Claudius is afforded more agency socially by being male, he squanders it by being totally controlled by the women in his life - a less extreme version of the recurring trope of him being a failed leader and a failed Roman man. 

The fact that this is an eighteenth-century opera also means that there's a lot to talk about in terms of gender alone - particularly, how the gender of the actor did not always align with the gender of the character they portrayed, and how that wasn't necessarily a bad thing.

In eighteenth century opera, the hero of the story was either written as a tenor or a contralto. In Agrippina, Otho fills the contralto role, thus making him the hero and male - or "male," in air quotes - lead. See, Otho, an indisputably male character, is written for the lowest female vocal range. And as it turns out, that's just /a thing that happened/ back then. Women were often cast in travesti roles, also called trouser roles, to give the hero a dynamic voice which did not pack the same commanding power of the bass, who was often the power that they were fighting against. It was not emasculating, as it might be seen today, for Otho to be played by a woman. Instead, the vocal range of the contralto helped to convey Otho's place within the social structure of the narrative, a young man contending with both more powerful forces and his own imperfections, but who will prevail due to his inherent goodness and strength. 

And who out of the main cast sings in the bass range, representing his power? You guessed it, Claudius. Whereas the novelty of Otho and Nero's voices grip the audience's attention and put them in a suspension of disbelief, Claudius's bass is just more /believable/. It's a voice that a person might expect to come out of a man on the street, just like it's coming out of the man on the stage, and that makes Claudius stand out a lot less. While bass was a versatile part in opera, the bass was rarely the main character - and rarely got the girl, if Agrippina's excitement at Claudius being dead didn't clue you in already. Being written as the bass underscores the fact that while Claudius should hypothetically have the most power out of anyone in the cast, he cannot effectively weild this power to enact his own will. In other words, even as the most powerful figure in the Roman world at the time, he can't make himself the main character. This simply isn't his story.

I saved Nero for last because his voice can probably teach us the most, not just about this opera, but about the ever-shifting parameters of gender. Nero is written as a castrato soprano: the highest male vocal range, achieved by - just like it sounds - castrating the performer before he hits puberty. This practice not only prevented the singer's voice from dropping, but also prevented his bones from developing and hardening like those of his uncastrated peers, giving him a bigger, more flexible ribcage for enhanced breath control. 

This is fascinating because while the ancient Romans were no strangers to the concept of castration, they weren't particularly fond of it. Ancient historians frequently associate eunuchs with the excesses of Egypt, Anatolia, and other non-Roman powers, mainly in order to other and emasculate foreign men. Suetonius even tries to demean and criticize Nero by bringing up his union with the castrsated boy Sporus. So if the emperor marrying a eunuch was a terrible thing, brought up as an example of what only the most unfit ruler would do, the emperor /being/ a eunuch? Awful. Unthinkable. Unmanly and un-Roman. But in opera, those same connotations simply weren't there. In her book /Voicing Gender/, Naomi Adele Andre states that on the contrary, "The otherworldly and ethereal voices of the castrati had been well suited to entertain the eighteenth-century monarchs whose political, social, and cultural position endowed them with supreme rights: they represented an embodiment of divine power."  While ancient Romans would have viewed it as repulsive excess to have castrated men performing for you, the powerful figures of eighteenth century Europe heavily disagreed. Which raises the question, why set your allegory about how much you hate the pope in pre-Christian Rome, especially if relevant social mores between the cultures were incompatible with each other?
 
Thankfully, since imperial Rome was such a popular setting for operas, scholars much more capable than myself have answered this. In his article Why Early Opera Is Roman and Not Greek, Robert C. Ketterer asserts that the autocratic set-up of imperial Rome served as a better mirror for the societies that would consume early opera than, say, democratic Greece. Another argument that Ketterer explores, which I think gels incredibly well with what we see in /Agrippina/, is that the "lack of restraint" which characterized the Baroque period had a striking parallel in the well-documented excesses of ancient Rome. While Romans held themselves to a cultural standard of austerity, those who shirked that expectation and indulged themselves - particularly those in power, who could afford to do so on a massive scale - led some of the most well-documented lives of their time, allowing Baroque-era writers to draw inspiration from them. Conversely, the culture that birthed sophrosune and the Aristotelian mean just couldn't measure up when it came to lavish excess. 

Oh, and that concept of putting your culture's most indulgent and thoughtless moments on display, as a notable exception to the rule? That might have been something Venetian Catholics could relate to, as they publically partied harder than usual in preparation for the austerity of Lent.

[musical interlude]

So, why does this exist? /Agrippina/ served as a thought-provoking exploration of agency, and a warning that those with the most power might be the least effective at using it, at a time when the War of Spanish Succession threatened the future of the Habsburg dynasty and the Pope refused to pick a side.  wrapped up in a narrative that is, above all, fun. Remember, this was written for party time, as much as it was meant to give people something to chew on in the coming days of Lent. And it's that aspect of fun, of spectacle, of leave-your-external-notions-of-morality-and-history-and-gender-at-the-opera-house-door-and-watch-this, that kept the show running for twenty-seven performances when it first debuted. After all, the messages about Pope Clement weren't going to be heard if no one wanted to see the show. And while Clement the Eleventh is no longer a political obstacle in today's world, the fact that people are still engaging with Handel and Grimani's statements on power mean that they absolutely succeeded in getting their points across. 

